feat: update bazel documentation and enable `bazel-module` manager (#22803)
renovatebot/renovate: docs/usage/bazel.md

# Bazel

Renovate supports upgrading dependencies in Bazel `WORKSPACE` files and `MODULE.bazel` files.

## How it works

> 1. Bazel support is enabled automatically

Reviewer: This list should be numbered like this:

```markdown
1. First item
1. Second item
1. Third item
1. Fourth item
```

2. Renovate will search for any `WORKSPACE` and `MODULE.bazel` files in the repository
3. Existing dependencies will be extracted from the files (see below for the supported dependency declarations)
4. Renovate will replace any old versions with the latest version available

## Bazel Module (`MODULE.bazel`) Support

### Bazel Registry Discovery

Bazel module version discovery centers around interrogation of one or more [Bazel registries](https://bazel.build/external/registry).

> A Bazel workspace can specify the registries that it uses by including [--registry](https://bazel.build/reference/command-line-reference#flag--registry) entries in [bazelrc files](https://bazel.build/run/bazelrc).

Author: The flags can be specified as command line arguments to Bazel or in a bazelrc file. Renovate only cares about the bazelrc files.

> Renovate will inspect a workspace's bazelrc files looking for registries to use during Bazel module version discovery.

Author: I reworded it a bit.

> If no registries are specified, it will default to the [Bazel Central Registry](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel-central-registry).

Author: I don't believe that your suggested edit is quite right. The reader is not checking for the registry entries. Renovate is doing this work.

> If no registries are specified, it will default to the [Bazel Central Registry](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel-central-registry).

Author: I reworded it a bit. Let me know if that works.

> The following are some important points about Renovate's Bazel registry discovery:
> 
> - Renovate will use all `--registry` flag values found in a workspace's `.bazelrc` file or any files transitively imported by the `.bazelrc` file.
> - Renovate will only use `--registry` flag values that are not associated with [a configuration](https://bazel.build/run/bazelrc#config).
> - Renovate will query the registries in the order that they are found in the bazlerc files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here are some important points about Renovate's Bazel registry searches.
Renovate will:

- use _all_ `--registry` flag values found in a workspace's `.bazelrc` file
- use any files that are transitively imported by a `.bazelrc` file
- only use `--registry` flag values that are not associated with [a configuration](https://bazel.build/run/bazelrc#config)
- query the registries in the order that they are found in the `.bazelrc` file
```

#### Example: Multiple bazelrc Files

> In the following example, there is a `.bazelrc` file that imports a file called `.registry.bazelrc`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, there is a `.bazelrc` file which imports another file called `.registry.bazelrc`.
```

The resulting registry list is:

1. <https://raw.githubusercontent.com/bazelbuild/bazel-central-registry/main>

### Supported Bazel Module Declarations

#### `bazel_dep`

Renovate will update the `version` value for a [bazel_dep](https://bazel.build/rules/lib/globals/module#bazel_dep) declaration.

```python
bazel_dep(name = "cgrindel_bazel_starlib", version = "0.15.0")
```

In the example above, the `0.15.0` will be evaluated against a repository's registries.
If a new version is found, the value will be replaced with the new version.

#### `git_override`

If Renovate finds a [git_override](https://bazel.build/rules/lib/globals/module#git_override), it will ignore the related `bazel_dep` and evaluate the `commit` value at the specified `remote`.

```python
bazel_dep(name = "cgrindel_bazel_starlib", version = "0.15.0")

git_override(
    module_name = "cgrindel_bazel_starlib",
    commit = "fb47f0e9f7c376a7700fc9fe3319231ae57880df",
    remote = "https://github.com/cgrindel/bazel-starlib.git",
)
```

If there is a more recent commit on the primary branch than the one listed, the `commit` value will be updated.

#### `single_version_override`

> The [single_version_override](https://bazel.build/rules/lib/globals/module#single_version_override) is a declaration with many purposes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [`single_version_override`](https://bazel.build/rules/lib/globals/module#single_version_override) is a declaration with many purposes.
```

Renovate evaluates two attributes from this declaration: `version` and `registry`.

If a `version` is specified, it overrides the version specified in the `bazel_dep` pinning it to the specified value.
In the following example, Renovate will note that the version has been pinned to `1.2.3`.
This will result in `rules_foo` being ignored for update evaluation.

```python
bazel_dep(name = "rules_foo", version = "1.2.4")

single_version_override(
  module_name = "rules_foo",
  version = "1.2.3",
)
```

If a `registry` is specified, Renovate will use the specified registry URL to check for a new version.
In the following example, Renovate will only use the `https://example.com/custom_registry` registry to discover `rules_foo` versions.

> Any registry values specified in the repository's bazlerc files will be ignored for the `rules_foo` module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any registry values specified in the repository's `.bazelrc` files will be ignored for the `rules_foo` module.
```

```python
bazel_dep(name = "rules_foo", version = "1.2.3")

single_version_override(
  module_name = "rules_foo",
  registry = "https://example.com/custom_registry",
)
```

#### `archive_override` and `local_path_override`

> If Renovate finds an [archive_override](https://bazel.build/rules/lib/globals/module#archive_override) or a [local_path_override](https://bazel.build/rules/lib/globals/module#local_path_override), it will ignore the related `bazel_dep`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If Renovate finds an [`archive_override`](https://bazel.build/rules/lib/globals/module#archive_override) or a [`local_path_override`](https://bazel.build/rules/lib/globals/module#local_path_override), it will ignore the related `bazel_dep`.
```

Since there are no versionable attributes on these declarations, no updates will occur.

```python
bazel_dep(name = "rules_foo", version = "1.2.3")

archive_override(
  module_name = "rules_foo",
  urls = [
    "https://example.com/archive.tar.gz",
  ],
)
```

#### `multiple_version_override`

> Renovate ignores [multiple_version_override](https://bazel.build/rules/lib/globals/module#multiple_version_override).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Renovate ignores [`multiple_version_override`](https://bazel.build/rules/lib/globals/module#multiple_version_override).
```

Do you think we should explain _why_ Renovate ignores `multiple_version_override`?

Author: Not really. The use case for `multiple_version_override` is very niche. If the reader is using it, they know why they are using it. I believe that the takeaway for the reader is "Renovate won't mess up your configuration".

> It does not affect the processing of version updates for a module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`multiple_version_override` does not affect the processing of version updates for a module.
```

> ## Legacy `WORKSPACE` File Support

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Legacy `WORKSPACE` files
```

> Existing dependencies will be extracted from `container_pull`, `oci_pull`, `git_repository`, `go_repository`, `maven_install`, and `http_archive`/`http_file` declarations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Renovate will extract dependencies from:

- `container_pull`
- `oci_pull`
- `git_repository`
- `go_repository`
- `maven_install`
- `http_archive` or `http_file` declarations
```

Let's make a list out of this long sentence.

# Bazel

Renovate upgrades dependencies in Bazel `WORKSPACE` files and `MODULE.bazel` files.

## How it works

1. Bazel support is enabled automatically
1. Renovate searches the repository for any `WORKSPACE` and `MODULE.bazel` files
1. Renovate extracts the dependencies it finds from the files (see below for the supported dependency declarations)
1. Renovate updates old dependencies to the latest version

## Bazel module (`MODULE.bazel`) support

### Bazel registry discovery

Renovate searches [Bazel registries](https://bazel.build/external/registry) to find new Bazel module versions.
You customize the registries your Bazel workspace uses by including [`--registry`](https://bazel.build/reference/command-line-reference#flag--registry) entries in your [`.bazelrc` files](https://bazel.build/run/bazelrc).
Renovate checks the workspace's `.bazelrc` files for custom registry entries.

> If no registries are found, Renovate defaults to the [Bazel Central Registry](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel-central-registry).

Reviewer: The current link points to the GitHub repository for the Bazel Central Registry.

I would expect to land on the registry, based on the link name.

Options:

1. Keep URL to GitHub repository and edit the link name to match the destination
2. Change URL to land on actual registry

```suggestion
If no registries are found, Renovate defaults to the [Bazel Central Registry](https://registry.bazel.build/).
```

I'll let you decide, as you know more about the Bazel users. 😉

Author: The actual registry is the GitHub repo. The URL that you suggested is for the catalog. It is a little confusing. I updated the URL to be the one that they advertise in the doc. It is a redirect to the URL that I had.

Here are some important points about Renovate's Bazel registry searches.
Renovate:

- uses _all_ `--registry` flag values found in a workspace's `.bazelrc` file
- uses any files that are transitively imported by a `.bazelrc` file
- only uses `--registry` flag values that are not associated with [a configuration](https://bazel.build/run/bazelrc#config)

> - queries the registries in the order that they are found in the `.bazelrc` file

Reviewer: We still mention the word `flag` here, is that intended?

Author: No. Good catch.

```python
bazel_dep(name = "cgrindel_bazel_starlib", version = "0.15.0")
```

In the example above, Renovate evaluates the `0.15.0` version against the repository's registries.
If Renovate finds a newer version, it updates `0.15.0` to match that version.

#### `git_override`

If Renovate finds a [`git_override`](https://bazel.build/rules/lib/globals/module#git_override), it ignores the related `bazel_dep` entry and instead evaluates the `commit` value at the specified `remote`.

```python
bazel_dep(name = "cgrindel_bazel_starlib", version = "0.15.0")

git_override(
    module_name = "cgrindel_bazel_starlib",
    commit = "fb47f0e9f7c376a7700fc9fe3319231ae57880df",
    remote = "https://github.com/cgrindel/bazel-starlib.git",
)
```

If the primary branch has a newer commit than in the list, Renovate updates the `commit` value.

#### `single_version_override`

The [`single_version_override`](https://bazel.build/rules/lib/globals/module#single_version_override) is a declaration with many purposes.
Renovate only evaluates _two_ attributes from this declaration: `version` and `registry`.

> If a `version` is specified, it overrides the version specified in the `bazel_dep` pinning it to the specified value.

Reviewer: This is a hard sentence to read, and also for me to rewrite. We're using the word `specified` three times.

Open for suggestions. 😉

Author: I trimmed it down. Does that work?

# Bazel

Renovate supports upgrading dependencies in Bazel `WORKSPACE` files and `MODULE.bazel` files.

## How it works

1. Bazel support is enabled automatically
1. Renovate will search for any `WORKSPACE` and `MODULE.bazel` files in the repository
1. Existing dependencies will be extracted from the files (see below for the supported dependency declarations)
1. Renovate will replace any old versions with the latest version available

## Bazel module (`MODULE.bazel`) support

### Bazel registry discovery

Renovate searches [Bazel registries](https://bazel.build/external/registry) to find new Bazel module versions.

> You can customize the registries your Bazel workspace uses by including [`--registry` CLI flag](https://bazel.build/reference/command-line-reference#flag--registry) entries in your [`bazelrc` files](https://bazel.build/run/bazelrc).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can customize the registries your Bazel workspace uses by including [`--registry` CLI flag](https://bazel.build/reference/command-line-reference#flag--registry) entries in your [`.bazelrc` files](https://bazel.build/run/bazelrc).
```

> You can customize the registries your Bazel workspace uses by including [`--registry` CLI flag](https://bazel.build/reference/command-line-reference#flag--registry) entries in your [`.bazelrc` files](https://bazel.build/run/bazelrc).

Author: I removed the reference to CLI flag. If a Bazel workspace maintainer uses custom registry settings, they will use `.bazelrc` files to specify these values. I don't think Introducing the CLI flag concept helps readers understand how Renovate will use the values.

> Renovate checks the workspace's `bazelrc` files for custom registry entries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Renovate checks the workspace's `.bazelrc` files for custom registry entries.
```

If no registries are specified, it will default to the [Bazel Central Registry](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel-central-registry).

> If you do not set any custom registries, Renovate defaults to the [Bazel Central Registry](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel-central-registry).

Author: Good catch.

Here are some important points about Renovate's Bazel registry searches.
Renovate will:

- use _all_ `--registry` flag values found in a workspace's `.bazelrc` file
- use any files that are transitively imported by a `.bazelrc` file
- only use `--registry` flag values that are not associated with [a configuration](https://bazel.build/run/bazelrc#config)
- query the registries in the order that they are found in the `.bazelrc` file

#### Example: multiple `.bazelrc` files

In this example, there is a `.bazelrc` file which imports another file called `.registry.bazelrc`.
Both those files have `--registry` values:

```
# -------------
# .bazelrc File
# -------------
import .registry.bazelrc
build --registry=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/bazelbuild/bazel-central-registry/main

# ----------------------
# .registry.bazelrc File
# ----------------------
build --registry=https://example.com/custom_registry
```

The resulting registry list is:

> 1. <https://example.com/custom_registry>
> 1. <https://raw.githubusercontent.com/bazelbuild/bazel-central-registry/main>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. `<https://example.com/custom_registry>`
1. `<https://raw.githubusercontent.com/bazelbuild/bazel-central-registry/main>`
```

#### Example: Registry entries using Bazel configuration

In this example, a `.bazelrc` file has registry values with and without a configuration:

```
# -------------
# .bazelrc File
# -------------
build:ci --registry=https://internal.server/custom_registry
build --registry=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/bazelbuild/bazel-central-registry/main
```

In this case the `https://internal.server/custom_registry` will be ignored.
The final registry list is:

1. `<https://raw.githubusercontent.com/bazelbuild/bazel-central-registry/main>`

### Supported Bazel module declarations

#### `bazel_dep`

> Renovate will update the `version` value for a [bazel_dep](https://bazel.build/rules/lib/globals/module#bazel_dep) declaration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Renovate will update the `version` value for a [`bazel_dep`](https://bazel.build/rules/lib/globals/module#bazel_dep) declaration.
```

```python
bazel_dep(name = "cgrindel_bazel_starlib", version = "0.15.0")
```

> In the example above, the `0.15.0` will be evaluated against a repository's registries.
> If a new version is found, the value will be replaced with the new version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the example above, Renovate evaluates the `0.15.0` version against the repository's registries.
If Renovate finds a newer version, it will update `0.15.0` to match that version.
```

How about something like this?

#### `git_override`

> If Renovate finds a [git_override](https://bazel.build/rules/lib/globals/module#git_override), it will ignore the related `bazel_dep` and evaluate the `commit` value at the specified `remote`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If Renovate finds a [`git_override`](https://bazel.build/rules/lib/globals/module#git_override), it will ignore the related `bazel_dep` and evaluate the `commit` value at the specified `remote`.
```

> If Renovate finds a [`git_override`](https://bazel.build/rules/lib/globals/module#git_override), it will ignore the related `bazel_dep` and evaluate the `commit` value at the specified `remote`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If Renovate finds a [`git_override`](https://bazel.build/rules/lib/globals/module#git_override), it ignores the related `bazel_dep` entry and instead evaluates the `commit` value at the specified `remote`.
```

```python
bazel_dep(name = "cgrindel_bazel_starlib", version = "0.15.0")

git_override(
    module_name = "cgrindel_bazel_starlib",
    commit = "fb47f0e9f7c376a7700fc9fe3319231ae57880df",
    remote = "https://github.com/cgrindel/bazel-starlib.git",
)
```

> If the primary branch has a newer commit than in the list, Renovate will update the `commit` value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the primary branch has a newer commit than in the list, Renovate updates the `commit` value.
```

> If there is a more recent commit on the primary branch than the one listed, the `commit` value will be updated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the primary branch has a newer commit than in the list, Renovate will update the `commit` value.
```

Could we go for something like this, where we use simpler words and explain what tool does what?

#### `single_version_override`

> The [`single_version_override`](https://bazel.build/rules/lib/globals/module#single_version_override) is a declaration with many purposes.
> Renovate evaluates two attributes from this declaration: `version` and `registry`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [`single_version_override`](https://bazel.build/rules/lib/globals/module#single_version_override) is a declaration with many purposes.
Renovate only evaluates _two_ attributes from this declaration: `version` and `registry`.
```

The text "is a declaration with many purposes." implies that there are more attributes/purposes, but Renovate can only check some of those attributes, or be used for some of those purposes?

Maybe emphasizing _only_ and _some_ makes it clearer that Renovate won't use the full range of options here?

Author: That sounds reasonable. In reality, this distinction is true for most of the declarations discussed in this doc. There are attributes on most of these declarations that are not relevant for Renovate.

```python
bazel_dep(name = "rules_foo", version = "1.2.3")

single_version_override(
  module_name = "rules_foo",
  registry = "https://example.com/custom_registry",
)
```

#### `archive_override` and `local_path_override`

If Renovate finds an [`archive_override`](https://bazel.build/rules/lib/globals/module#archive_override) or a [`local_path_override`](https://bazel.build/rules/lib/globals/module#local_path_override), it will ignore the related `bazel_dep`.
Because these declarations lack versionable attributes, Renovate will not update them.

```python
bazel_dep(name = "rules_foo", version = "1.2.3")

archive_override(
  module_name = "rules_foo",
  urls = [
    "https://example.com/archive.tar.gz",
  ],
)
```

#### `multiple_version_override`

Renovate ignores [`multiple_version_override`](https://bazel.build/rules/lib/globals/module#multiple_version_override).
`multiple_version_override` does not affect the processing of version updates for a module.

## Legacy `WORKSPACE` files

Renovate will extract dependencies from:

- `container_pull`
- `oci_pull`
- `git_repository`
- `go_repository`
- `maven_install`
- `http_archive` or `http_file` declarations

### `git_repository`

> Renovate will update any `git_repository` declaration that has the following:

Reviewer: Do we mean Renovate needs all _three_ items, or just _any one_ of them?

Author: The declaration needs all three of the listed items.

Renovate uses the list of **tags** on the remote repository (GitHub) to detect a new version.

> ### `http_archive` and `http_file`

Reviewer: Did you check if monospacing the heading at line 177 and 197 breaks any links? I don't know if we have links in the first place, but you should check.

Renovate uses the list of **tags** on the remote repository (GitHub) to detect a new version.

### `http_archive` and `http_file`

> Renovate will update any `http_archive` or `http_file` declaration that has the following:

Reviewer: Same _one_ or _all three_ question applies here.

Author: All three
